---
layout: post
title:  Types of Software Testing
date:   2021-04-01 22:50
image:  oop.jpg
tags:   [Fundation, Testing]
---

## Introduction

Testing is the process of executing program with aim of finding errors. To make our software perform well it should be error-free. If testing is done successfully it will remove all the errors from the software.

## Unit Testing 

**It focuses on the smallest unit of software design**. In this, we test an individual unit of group of interrelated unit. It is often done by programmer by using sample input and observing its corresponding outputs.

1. In a program we are checking if loop, method or function is working fine.
2. Misunderstood or incorrect, arithmetic precendence.
3. Incorrect initialization.

## Integration Testing

**The object is to take unit tested components and build program structure that has been dicated by design**. Integration testing is testing in which a group of components is combined to product output.

Integration testing is of four types:

1. Top-down
2. Bottom-up
3. Sandwich
4. Big-bang

* Black Box testing:- It is used for validation. In this we ignore internal working mechanism and focuse on what is the output?.
* White Box testing:- It is used for verification. In this we focus on internal mechanism i.e. how the output is achieved?

## Regression Testing 

**Every time a new module is added leads to changes in the program**. This type of testing makes sure that the whole component works properly even after adding components to complete program.

For example, in school record suppose we have module staff, students and finance combining these modules and checking if on integration these module works fine is regression testing.

## Some Testing

**This test is done to make sure that sofware under testing is ready or stable for further testing**. It is called a smoke test as the testing an initial pass is done to check if it did not catch fire or smoke in the initial switch on.

For example, if project has 2 modules so before going to module make sure that module 1 works properly.

## Alpha Testing 

This is a type of validation testing. **It is a type of acceptance testing which is done before the production is released to customers**. It is typicall done by QA people.

## Beta Testing 

The beta test is conducted at one or more customer sites by the end-user of the software. This version is released for a limited number of users for testing in a real-time environment.

## System Testing

**This software is tested such that it works fine for the different operating systems**. It is covered under the black box testing technique. In this, we just focus on the required input and output without focusing on internal working. 

In this, we have security testing, recovery testing, stress testing, and performance testing . For example, this include functional as well as non functional testing

## Stress Testing

In this, **we give unfavorable conditions to the system and check how they perform in those conditions**.

For example:

1. Test cases that require maximum memory or other resources are executed.
2. Test cases that may cause thrashing in a virtual operating system.
3. Test cases that may cause excessive disk requirement.

## Performance Testing 

It is designed to test the run-time performance of software within the context of an integrated system. It is used to test the speed and effectiveness of the program. It is also called load testing. **In it we check, what is the performance of the system in the given load**.

Reference

<https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/types-software-testing/>
